# Predicting Cellular Drug Responses Over Time with Signaling-Guided Recurrent Neural Networks

## Short Background
Protein phosphorylation is a reversible post-translational modification (PTM) that plays a role in propagating signals through the molecular networks of the cell. In mammalian cells, this process typically occurs on the side chains of serine, threonine, and tyrosine amino acids<sup>1</sup>. Dysregulation of protein phosphorylation is a hallmark of cancer, making phosphoproteomics a useful tool to understand molecular signaling in cancer cells<sup>2</sup>. Mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics allows for genome wide analysis of phosphorylated proteins, enabling identification and quantification of thousands of phosphorylation sites in each biological sample<sup>1</sup>. Despite the abundance of data, it has been challenging to translate this into a systematic understanding of cellular signaling, in particularly to understanding how cellular responses to various drugs vary over time, across different cell lines and in different doses. The development of predictive models that can accurately predict cellular signaling, and thus predict phosphoproteomic profiles in response to drug treatments holds promise to advance personalized cancer treatment strategies.

## Aims & Objectives
The purpose of this project is to advance personalized cancer treatments by improving our understanding of how cellular signaling networks respond to drug treatments over time. The primary goal is to develop a predictive Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) model capable of forecasting changes in protein phosphorylation dynamics. This will involve integrating prior knowledge of signaling networks into the RNN framework to constrain its predictions, enabling the model to account for variations in drug type, dose, and cell line. This approach seeks to provide a systematic tool for analyzing time-resolved phosphoproteomic data and exploring the molecular mechanisms that drive differential cellular responses.

## Main approach & Methods
The core method of this project is to develop a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) model, adapted from the intracellular signaling simulation framework LEMBAS<sup>3</sup>, to predict time-resolved phosphoproteomic data instead of transcription factor activity. The output will be the predicted phosphorylation states of proteins over time, with input consisting of experimental conditions (drug type, concentration, cell line). Signaling network constraints, derived from publicly available databases such as KEGG and SIGNOR<sup>4</sup>, will be incorporated into the sparse matrix defining protein interactions within the RNN.
Publicly available phosphoproteomic data will be used, requiring the creation of custom pipelines for preprocessing and integration<sup>5,6</sup>. We will first develop a toy-model and validate it with synthetic data to ensure the model's correctness. Model optimization will be done using cross-validation, with an independent validation dataset used for final evaluation. PyTorch will be used for the deep learning framework, along with Pandas, NumPy, and Matplotlib for data analysis and visualization. 

## Selected References
1. Gerritsen, J. S. & White, F. M. Phosphoproteomics: a valuable tool for uncovering molecular signaling in cancer cells. Expert Rev. Proteomics 18, 661–674 (2021).
2. Hanahan, D. & Weinberg, R. A. Hallmarks of Cancer: The Next Generation. Cell 144, 646–674 (2011).
3. Nilsson, A., Peters, J. M., Meimetis, N., Bryson, B. & Lauffenburger, D. A. Artificial neural networks enable genome-scale simulations of intracellular signaling. Nat. Commun. 13, 3069 (2022).
4. Türei, D., Korcsmáros, T. & Saez-Rodriguez, J. OmniPath: guidelines and gateway for literature-curated signaling pathway resources. Nat. Methods 13, 966–967 (2016).
5. Zecha, J. et al. Decrypting drug actions and protein modifications by dose- and time-resolved proteomics. Science 380, 93–101 (2023).
6. Maier, B. D. A Phosphoproteomics Data Resource for Systems-level Modeling of Kinase Signaling Networks. https://prelights.biologists.com?p=35317 (2023) doi:10.1242/prelights.35317.
